[Music]
joining us here dr. mukajee on the India
today Conclave remember the viewers you
can ask some questions as well on social
media all our sites are open for this
econ claim but a pookajee I want to
start with New York the city where you
are your professional choice of work
arguably the global Corona capital of
the world more than eleven thousand
deaths in New York 34 thousand across
the United States
what has coronavirus meant for the
United States in New York this open free
society that saw itself as a world
superpower at the cutting edge of Health
and Science has this been a wake-up call
well of course it's been a wake-up call
has been a wake-up call for the entire
world I would say you know it is fair to
say that New York is as you may well
know under lockdown shut down for a
while the hospitals were overwhelmed we
are now seeing that the peak has now
gone down for the last few days of
deaths and ICU admissions so there it
seems that the worst of the storm may
have passed but again we're still under
lockdown and and there is a very great
fear that if we open too quickly then we
will get a second resurgence of the
virus and again another set of ICU
admissions and deaths as far as a
wake-up call yes of course it's been a
wake-up call for the entire country we I
think in America the realization that
there were fundamental systems that were
not working optimally broken became
obvious you could you can you know you
can liken it to America having a full
body cat scan the whole American medical
system and in fact the American economic
system having a full body cat scan and
that cat scan has revealed some
strengths and and heroism among people
but also has also
reveal like cat-scans do the
malignancies that were hidden the points
of weakness the vulnerabilities that
were hidden give you some examples of
this you know one of the workers in one
of the wealthiest countries in the world
two things are happening simultaneously
one is that for a while doctors and
nurses couldn't find an n95 respirator
the kind that you use to protect
yourself against a virus infection if
you're a doctor or nurse you couldn't
find them so that shows you one peak or
one edge on the other edge of American
innovation they are now at least you
know promising looking drug candidate
and very promising looking antibody
combinations cocktails that the American
scientists American and ingenuity is
producing and in fact this has been this
has been also a wake-up call about how
global and how cooperative research can
be and when it is even if done properly
how quickly you could respond to a
pandemic I'm gonna come to that research
in a moment dr. mukajee but I want to
ask you this question as I said the
world especially India has always looked
at America as the global leader in the
medical space are there any lessons
therefore that India can learn from the
American experience over the last month
the first and most important lesson is
to be prepared and preparation makes all
all the difference the we are now as we
analyze as we analyze the the number of
days that went by before the United
States had a good detection test I did a
calculation yesterday you would be
shocked at the calculation the first
case I was reported in the United States
on January 21st this was in Washington
State near Seattle the first case was
reported in January 21st the first
proper kits for detection
really available until you know the
first week of March so we're talking
about 40 days now the virus all viruses
have a number attached to them which we
call are not or not is the number of
people that you can spread the virus to
some viruses have an enormous number
measles is you know you spread it to
many many people other other viruses
have a very small or not if it depends
of course on the community if you're
very close together they are not
increases if you're very far apart they
are not decreases one of the reasons to
keep people under lockdown is to bring
the are not below zero below one sorry
now if if you just understand you know
simple biology 101 as it were if that
number is greater than 1 if you are
infecting more than one person then the
rise of infections is exponential you
will infect 3 people 3 will infect 9
people
9 will infect you know 27 and so forth
if you calculate if you calculate or not
I did this calculation yesterday last
night late in in while I was finishing
up a paper if you calculate or not from
that from those 40 days that we didn't
have a detection kit me weren't in
quarantine etc that number is 1.2 or
something to the power of 17 that is
that is several hundred times the entire
human population from that one patient
if you assume that one patient infected
three patients a day and those three
infected three more that's it's three to
the power of 40 which is which is
hundred times or maybe a thousand times
don't let me remember the the entire
size of the human population it's more
stars than there are in our galaxy again
by several hundred times so preparation
is key
you know it's a preparation you know yes
you know but but but dr. mukajee what
you are saying therefore brings me to
the next question you note so
brilliantly on the history of cancer and
EMM in the Emperor of all maladies
cancer was seen as the great enemy in a
way at the time
what makes Karuna is so different to
cancer or any other medical challenge
that mankind has been confronted with
this contagion that is spreading right
across the world crossing all boundaries
what makes her own are so different to
what we've seen of any virus also in the
past well so there are two features that
are particularly complicated and there
may be more than that but there are two
features feature number one which is
probably the most important and was
recognized quite late
is that asymptomatic carriers can carry
the virus and spirits that means that
the and or or pre-symptomatic carriers
in other words you may have you may feel
completely fine but you may be reading
the virus this is very unique this is
not the case for instance for Coronas
cousin called SARS it's not the case as
far as we know for Coronas cousin
another cousin called MERS both of which
are very dangerous viruses the lethality
of SARS is actually much greater than
than the lethality of Corona so that's
one feature and the second one is is
exactly what I just talked about is that
in if you don't have any protection the
so called are not of the virus the
number of people that you can infect if
you are a real viral carrier is is very
large
now even within that there are some
people that we're now identifying called
super spreaders and we don't know why
but their viral load as well as the
amount of viral load the tips they're
expelling into the world is actually
even an exponent higher than the than
the others so these two features I mean
we can keep on talking more and more
about Corona of it but these two
features are really unique about this
virus and make it very hard to contain
because if you're not sick and but
you're still spreading the virus you
won't know
where'd you put yourself into quarantine
whether to isolate yourself and how many
people you exposed you know the reason
I'm ask you this dr. mukajee's because
various theories are doing the rounds
and I'm still trying to understand does
the medical world really know what is
the pathogenesis of this virus does it
affect young or old asymptomatic or
symptomatic warm countries are better
equipped to confront the viral than
milder temperature color is do we really
know what this enemy called corona is
yet so so the answer is we know a little
bits of it we don't know all the
information we know little bits of the
information well we know some of the
patterns we know that young people seem
to have a milder disease but let that
let it be said that there are plenty of
people in their 20s and 30s who have
died from corona virus so so so although
young people tend to have a milder
version of the disease for reasons that
we really don't know some people some
young people have a very very severe
version of the disease we heard of a
young British nurse yesterday or day
before yesterday 25 26 years old who
passed away you know on having been on a
ventilator we know that older people are
more susceptible we know that if you
have a pre-existing condition including
obesity diabetes immune expression
cancer especially cancer patients who
are receiving chemotherapy for other
cancers and our immune suppressed they
have a very high rate of severe illness
we know a lot about the virus we know
this we now know the sequence of the
virus we know how many genes it makes we
know what the virus looks like they're
microscopic studies and we know
potential places that we could will come
to drugs in a second but we know
potential places to attack the virus and
a potential place to make a vaccine
against the virus but these take time
these all of these things have taken
time we have done this in truly record
speed faster than anything that I can
remember so we know a lot about the
virus we know a lot of features of the
virus but there are many things that are
unknown one of those unknowns of course
is what you just said
the drugs and the vaccine because you
know one of the theories for a cure is
hydroxychloroquine india's just exported
it to the United States and other theory
countries with BCG Manila
immunization programs like India are
perhaps better equipped to take on the
virus how do you see do we have a theory
there's much talk today of an American
company which claims to have got a drug
that could combat corona are we any
close to having a drug or vaccine and is
there any truth in hydro
hydroxychloroquine or indeed BCG vaccine
theories so let's take those questions
one in each arm I am let me take a step
back before I answer the question and it
would be a long answer so just be
prepared when you develop a new drug
against a virus or any microbe there
especially in the in the context of a
pandemic it really goes through certain
phases the first phase is a drug that
can be developed from a previously
existing human drug so this is called
drug repurposing so in other words the
drug is already existing in the human
pharmacopoeia we repurpose it to use it
in in for this for this virus those are
the ones that come first and the reason
is that we know that their safety
profile is is likely to be the best so
there are several drugs in that category
but the two that stood out stand out one
of them is hydroxychloroquine and as you
said and the second one is a drug called
REM disappeared from Gilead
pharmaceuticals so let's take those two
we'll come back to those two in a second
so the first category as I said is is
repurposed drugs drugs are already been
in humans the second set of drugs that
will come on are antibodies not vaccines
these are antibodies that are made to
specifically latch on to coronavirus we
know exactly where to latch on to
because the viral structure has been
solved for the most part and the
structure of the so called spike protein
the part that attaches itself to cells
has been solved and the domain the sub
part
where its most likely to work as not is
now known this will probably be a
cocktail of vaccines
so if cocktail of antibodies and they're
being made right now by several
companies and we actually Kiran Shah of
bio Khan and I are in constant
conversation to try and make these
available in India under a licensing
agreement so you'll hear more about that
in a second through sin gene biocon etc
we are in almost daily conversations to
license them and bring them the trouble
with antibodies is that they're much
harder to make it's not like making
tylenol or making penicillin or
hydroxychloroquine you have to produce
them in these enormous tanks almost the
size of a swimming pool and you have to
keep them clean and decontaminated and
extract out the antibodies they are very
likely to work and we will see them in
human trials probably in June at the
earliest because they take a lot of time
to make the third category is new drugs
that we invent from scratch new
molecules and there are several
candidates there these candidates
usually they attack the virus viruses
capacity to make copies of itself we
should take a step back and say what is
a virus a virus is a piece of genetic
material with the coat which goes inside
cells and then parasitizes the cell's
genetic apparatus to make more and more
copies of itself that's what a virus is
so viruses have special genes in them as
well as the cells genes that they use to
make copies of themselves so the third
category I'm sorry I hope everyone's
following with me it's fascinating go
ahead the third category are new drugs
that are made from scratch by screening
against specific parts of of this virus
copying machinery these take even longer
because the first step there is to go
through safety studies in humans the so
called phase one or even phase zero
study after you've finished some animal
studies to go through some human studies
to ensure that in fact these work and
then phase 2 and phase 3 studies
randomized studies to look at whether it
is work or not the final category the
fourth one is a vaccine that's take the
longest time there's of course the most
effective in the context of a population
but they take a very long time because
of several reasons they you have to get
the right vaccine you have to get your
target the right protein but most
importantly remember you're giving the
vaccine to people who have no disease so
your safety profile for vaccine has to
be extraordinary so that's so we usually
the fastest that we can generate a
vaccine is has been on the order of you
know 12 16 18 months and then you have
to vaccinate people that takes another
12 months let's say across the world so
you're really looking at a vaccine that
is about 18 20 months away we are
accelerating that at Adam at a massive
speed but you're really looking at a
vaccine that's really about 20 months
away so you're probably looking at it
towards the end of 2021 I just work I
there was an interesting Court of yours
dr. mukajee recently saying that if
there is a drug or antibody it should be
produced in India just trying to
understand what that means what are you
trying to say do you believe that the
Indian medical system will throw up the
drug the vaccine well certainly it can
but right now but what the effort has
been to find the best candidates and
licensed them so that they can be made
in in in India and by licensing you
essentially approach we we have a
consortium that that we've created and
has existed for a while and licensing
essentially allows us to bring that drug
candidate to India to produce it because
if it's going to be an antibody though
the world's capacity to produce it will
be stressed because the number of people
that are involved so everyone will have
to pitch in as I said these are made in
vats you need a lot of training to make
them you need a facility that is
certified to make them and so so it's
not just a trivial production and
certainly everyone is involved there
Indian scientists there are scientists
from Korea from the United States and
everywhere involved the the hope is to
take that the leading candidates whether
it be the antibody or the or the small
molecules and try to produce them in
India or import them in the importing is
is harder usually the prices are out of
range of what Indian of what Indian
citizens can even pay so the the better
model is to license it and and have the
license for India alone and that can be
done it just takes time let me I
interesting question from Naveen
bhardwaj and I'm looking at the present
now not looking at 12 to 18 months when
hopefully as you said 20 months from now
we might have a vaccine Naveen bhardwaj
asked what is the best strategy for this
pandemic is it targeting herd immunity
while deploying a new treatment example
plasma therapy to avoid fatalities or is
it simply as most countries are doing
now staying locked down with minimal
economic activity is there well so it's
so so first of all there is no one
there's no one solution because it's
it's a combination of solutions and
it'll have to be phased in and this is
why preparation is very important
there's a lot of different opinions
different opinions on this
you know countries can only stay in
lockdown for so long so why are we doing
a lockdown well there are there are the
point of the lockdown is that as I said
if you don't do lockdown the virus
spreads exponentially I gave you a
number that's a shocking number forty
days but no with full contact and you
get some number multiplied by 10 to the
power of 17 you know more than the
world's population by a hundred a
hundredfold
so so you I should say more than the
world's population by several so the
point of the lockdown is to decrease
that are not valued it's a decrease
everything is to decrease they are not
valued because right now we don't have a
therapy so a lockdown is basically a
decrease of beyond all right now why
what do you want to do that because
that way we don't overwhelm the hospital
systems because the only care that we
have available right now for sick
patients is is supportive care we don't
have a medicine and if you overwhelm the
hospitals the situation becomes like
Italy or like Spain where basically
every hospital was totally overwhelmed
by by patients by locking down or by
shutting it down
you you smoothen the curve of or lower
the curve of the spread of the infection
now there are many strategies to get out
of a lockdown and is there's a lot of
debate about this I have my own opinion
about it the first thing that I think
that has to happen is that they're the
only conditions where we can get out of
lock downs our number one testing so
test and detect and figure out what the
real numbers are of the rate of
infection so that you can find out
whether this is a pandemic in this
community this is a pandemic everywhere
is the pandemic located in certain
places in Delhi or certain places in
Mumbai or is it in all over so that's
one number two is quarantine and
isolation of people who are virally
infected and that needs to be enforced
and that can be done using all sorts of
technology can be done with low-tech
high tech however you want it but it can
be done the third is masking so you can
lock yourself down you know in your
house but you can also lock your
respiratory system down and by that I
mean you can prevent the virus from
coming in and you can also prevent you
from spreading the virus to other people
so so a nice sound distancing masking I
mean it you know what the you know the
Indian system has been locked down of a
fierce lockdown it's also been a dr.
Mookerjee masks are being made mandatory
increasingly esting perhaps has not been
done enough so do you think that these
are this is the sort of three-pronged
strategy that any country must go
through is it a one size fits all
strategy in that sense at least as far
as these three points go it's so exactly
right and and phasing and and phasing
and constant testing so phasing and
constant testing is part of this so
as you open the lock down you need to
test you need to be able to isolate in
quarantine and contact trace the trace
contacts and number three you need I
would say as as Universal facial masking
with the highest grade masks available
or possible - to be able to do this
leave it leaves a very important open
question which is to do about children
because children are asymptomatic
carriers and locking down children in
other words not getting them to school
is essentially locking down at least one
of their parents and usually the mother
for working mothers this is an extremely
difficult situation because you can't
have childcare at home as well as be
working outside so what you do so one
solution that we've been thinking about
is where the children whether we could
invent and also enforce masking for
children in schools if you have to open
schools so again the the first phases of
this are it's not one size fits all but
the principles apply right across every
country as you remove a lockdown you
have to do it in phases
you know masking detection and
quarantine are going to be permanent
parts parts of our lives the next six
eight months as far as I can tell we've
just got about two three minutes and I
just want a few quick answers to a few
questions that are coming in for you
doctor one of them is is there any
evidence that genetically South Asians
might be less impacted by corona virus
does a gene predispose people to fall
prey to certain values this is obviously
someone who's read your book on genes
yes sir so there's a major effort
there's a major effort right going on
right now to sequence several thousand
genomes and look for susceptibility to
corona virus you know the answer is
going to be probably yes but we don't
know what those genes are and we don't
know we have no evidence thus far to
know or understand whether South Asians
are more protected or less protected we
just don't have the answers what's your
prognosis of the future dare I say a
post corona world will it be a better
safer world or a
we change world as Sakshi well it'll be
it'll be a changed world for sure we
will be better prepared hopefully for
the next pandemic and we will be on the
constant vigilance you know I think we
reacted late to this many countries we
acted late to this and and that delay as
I said was an exponential delay and so
we will see a changed world a changing
one of those changes as I think this is
a question I want to ask India invest
just 1.2 percent in public health
doctors in many hospitals working in
sub-standard hospitals do you believe
one of those changes will be a reset
where Public Health has to be put above
the agenda I think health and public
health in general after we put on top of
the agenda I mean for a country of its
size and 1.2 percent is a is a is a
terrible number and and there is really
you know pandemic preparedness requires
an enormous investment and and and you
see what happens when you don't prepare
you know you may be saving what you know
your 1.2 billion or dollars but your if
you shut your economy first for you know
one day you will you will you will
expend that in in in in days so right
absolutely you know this is a this is a
this is this is something that should
deserves more investment very quickly
cancel stigmatize do you see corona
being stigmatized well it's been
stigmatized here I mean there's you know
there's been racism against Chinese
Americans with nothing to do with the
pandemic you know I think the idea is
that it will there will be a stigma
attached to people who get infected
there we should obviously are one of our
jobs is to prevent that but to also
encourage them to be in quarantine as
long as they can sir at their own spread
but spread the virus final question at a
personal level how have you dealt with
the Karuna challenge I know that you are
probably going to hospital as a health
worker so you're out and about lot of
health workers I know affected in New
York is that something that has been
personally very difficult for you to
deal with
well I mean again for cancer patients I
mean I'm an oncologist my particular
arena has been to keep them safe it is
to keep people who have immune
compromised safe and try to maintain the
protocols and the therapies that they're
normally getting even under very reduced
circumstances and we're trying our best
but that's been the main impact the
hospitals have been you know severely
colleague who's asked a question Charlie
the boss wants to know dr. mukajee how
much credence are you giving to the
theories doing the rounds that this
virus was made in a lab in China well I
think that I think it's very unlikely we
have made in a lab in China I think you
know the virus sequence resembles as far
as we know viruses that are found
endemic ly in bats so I personally don't
believe that I know there's a lot of
conspiracy theory around it that's that
you know the virus sequence doesn't
suggest that to me final question this
is from Salone asking will we see dr.
mukajee write a book one day on meeting
the corona challenger history of the
virus and interpret history of the virus
well so you know I'm a viral
immunologist by training my lab works on
viruses different viruses are not a
corona expert but I work on different
viruses in viral immunology I have a
book which has a big section on vaccines
and and viruses but I don't think I'll
be writing a history of the corona virus
at least at least as far as I can tell
you know dr. mukajee it's been a
pleasure talking to you you've given us
a real sense of what the world is up
against you've taken time off at a very
difficult time
thank you very much stay safe stay well
well let me just say that you know we
the main the the main thing that we want
is to buy time for ourselves until we
get a good drug vaccine or drug
candidates so if everyone can put pitch
in and buy us time there are drugs
coming there is hope at this end of this
tunnel there are drugs coming the
vaccine will be there there will be
effective medicine
so just buy us time by preventing the
spread of virus and deaths that is your
everyone's job as a public citizen is to
buy us time and listen to the way that
we are were responding to the virus as a
role medical community if you can buy us
time we we are trying our best to make
new drugs against this virus and there
will be a drug and an antibody and
potentially that's a great message to
send a message of hope in a way there
will be a drug there will be a vaccine
for now simply bide time stay home stay
safe dr. mukajee thank you very much
it's been a pleasure having you here
on the india today ii contry thanks very
much
[Music]